---
layout: single
title: Flattening Design
summary: What the debate behind the debate of skeuomorphism is really about.
---

My first reaction to the recent flurry of [discussion around skeuomorphic design elements](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/01/technology/apple-shake-up-could-mean-end-to-real-world-images-in-software.html?_r=1&&pagewanted=all), particularly as used in Apple software, was startled relief. It suggested to me that my own reliance on flat, minimal websites and interfaces might actually have a foundation in justified theory rather than simply indicating I was a bad designer. Which, frankly, is what I had always assumed. I'm what I like to call a "digital native designer" – I have no formal design background and was "designing" with HTML and CSS years before I knew Photoshop existed. I cut my teeth learning more about web standards than visual design. This has resulted in me being not all that enamored with bells and whistles, textures and gloss, gradients and drop shadows, and not much of a fan of rich, skeuomorphic-based design.

Is this purely a question of taste? Possibly. When I did first start discovering there was such a thing as capital-D "Design," it was with early 20th century movements in graphics, art and architecture. I fell in love with the Bauhaus's flat colors and sharp angles, with streamlined Art Deco, with mid-century modernism's elegance and inventiveness. Clean lines and simplicity. Minimalism and open space. I still love it. It's no wonder the work I do reflects this.

As the larger discussion rolls out, however, there is more to talk about than taste. There is the opportunity to discuss the reasons behind Apple-style skeuomorphism rising to the level it has in the first place. Yes, it seems the initial reason was the taste of Steve Jobs – but, ask defenders of the style today, and you'll hear a refrain of a reason that goes beyond taste: namely, using real-world representation in our interface design is good because it mirrors what users of the software already know and are comfortable with.

And this is where it all starts to go wrong. Now, for the record, I love software users. They are delightful, important people. I happen to be one myself. I advocate strongly for our consideration in the software development process and we deserve interfaces that make software efficient and pleasant to use. It's essential to be able to understand user behavior and preference and to design effectively for it.

However. There is a difference between designing effectively for your user in a deliberate, targeted way and designing automatically at the lowest common denominator in an attempt to blindly sweep away any user shortcomings. The difference is process. It's not about the result so much as it's about how we got there. Shoehorning an experience designed for one medium into another medium simply because people are familiar with the first experience, is not good design process.

The trend towards skeuomorphism *is* dangerous – not because recreating physical experiences in a virtual environment is inherently wrong, but because the habit of doing so is lazy design thinking. It's not design thinking at all. It's a reflexive practice that skips the process of thinking about the specific needs, constraints and possibilities of the specific design problem. And the acceptance and defense of that unthinking habit gives rise to the expectation that design only equals this exact same degree of visual gymnastics – which, in the realm of software development, only furthers to box design into a category of "pretty-making" rather than integrating it into a cohesive process of problem-solving. This is also why choosing a design solution only because it literally translates to what users already know is indefensible. It's defaulting to a catch-all fix rather than a process of engaging the challenges of a new medium and it precludes the possibility of a better design solution.

This is not to say that putting a gradient or shadow on your application's buttons is evil. It's not to say that making your application look like stitched leather is evil. It's not to say using a real-world object representation for your icon is evil. There may be design problems to which these are perfectly appropriate solutions, and, beyond that, your preference for one or another is a matter of taste. However, this is to say that we, as an industry and profession, can be constantly questioning this problem-solving process, to make sure it's happening as effectively as it can be – indeed, to make sure it's happening at all, and to make sure we're providing good examples about how to solve problems with design. Because that's pretty much why I do what I do, and I want to speak up in support of it being done right. I'm not here to make things pretty. I'm here to solve problems.

Designers, and most creative people, are bad about revealing their processes. In my talk about explaining design to developers, I use the example of *Mad Men*'s Don Draper, a fictional, mid-century advertising rockstar who maintains his reputation as a creative genius largely by surrounding his process with smoke and mirrors. He does have creative talent, yes. But he doesn't understand how to control or articulate it, and it also becomes clear that the mystery around what he does is one of the ways he defends his territory. Without understanding of what he does, and with the crippling fear someone else will come along and do it better, he is completely unable to grow as a creative person.

Designers, don't be like Don Draper. (Except dressing like him. You can do that, his clothes are pretty solid. His [Old Fashioned recipe](http://youtu.be/2VpgEHsPc7I) is also emulative.) We can honor the creative impulse and spark while still respecting our craft enough to understand it and hold it to processes of articulated thought. It's way past time to relinquish the age-old, ego-boosting notion that creativity is handed down to a chosen few from divinity on high in a mystical, ineffable flash of inspiration. It's time to take complete responsibility for understanding what we're doing and why.

That's what the debate behind the debate of skeuomorphic design is really about. It's about how designers solve the problems of making beautiful, functional, usable software. It's about how we communicate with developers and users. It's about how we respect ourselves as much as we respect them, and it's about how we serve all of these purposes by being innovative and thoughtful in our solutions. There is no one style or practice anyone should dictate to do or not do. It's just about doing better and making sure we're not afraid to push ahead.