---
layout: post
title: Promises
summary: About Springsteen, stories and how to tell my own.
category: articles
---

If you ask me where I come from, the most honest answer I can give is: "I'm from a Bruce Springsteen song." After all, that question never is really just about location. It's about how you feel about where you're from, what your relationship to that location had been and what it is now. It's about what your story is. To respond to that question, I could say, "Rural northeastern Ohio," and then spend a lot of time determining how much explanation is appropriate to describe the complex and contradictory story around the answer. Or I could say, "Ever heard a Springsteen album? Yeah. That's me."

Working–class, small–town, steel and farm country. Homes broken by lies and silence. Misfits who never did what they were supposed to very well and just wanted to get away. Yearning and hope and desolation and rebellion and anger. They're not particularly original tales. But they need their place just as much as any other.

<object width="560" height="315"><param name="movie" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/_zYf9Uw-6Ak?hl=en_US&amp;version=3"></param><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always"></param><embed src="http://www.youtube.com/v/_zYf9Uw-6Ak?hl=en_US&amp;version=3" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="560" height="315" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true"></embed></object>

I grew up among people who had been beaten down and who endured day to day without conviction it would ever get better. I saw people beat themselves down, physically, emotionally, because they had no choice, and if they had ever had the choice at one point they had made the wrong one. I saw bitterness and regret and quiet, isolating desperation. There was never enough money, never enough time. There were long hours of hard work and periods of silence spent building up walls so the pain of life couldn't get in, so they could stand to keep doing the work, because they had no choice. Of course, once the walls were in place, nothing else got in, either – not peace, not joy, not other people.

<object width="560" height="315"><param name="movie" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/A12-Z9F55v0?version=3&amp;hl=en_US"></param><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always"></param><embed src="http://www.youtube.com/v/A12-Z9F55v0?version=3&amp;hl=en_US" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="560" height="315" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true"></embed></object>

As I grew up, there was nothing for a heart to connect with but the dream of escape, of leaving the pieces of broken hopes back behind with the crumbling steel mills, the vanishing small towns and the people who kept moving around in circles and never getting anywhere. There was nothing but the idea of beating everyone else for once. It was foolish and beautiful, and Springsteen made it real. He understood all of it and he could even explain it to you, back when you knew what you felt but you didn't know how to put it into words. If no one else understood, that was okay. That's what car stereos turned up all the way on dark, lonely roads were for.

<object width="420" height="315"><param name="movie" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/kJBYWgfIXdw?version=3&amp;hl=en_US"></param><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always"></param><embed src="http://www.youtube.com/v/kJBYWgfIXdw?version=3&amp;hl=en_US" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="420" height="315" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true"></embed></object>

For most of my life, that was my story–coming from that place of darkness and waiting for something brighter. I went from confused childhood to depressed young adulthood, and tripped into early single motherhood. My twenties were a time where I had to work hard and put up walls and shut out the pain and stress however I could, and I didn't even realize how well I followed that template I had learned from the beginning. So well that it was a shock to realize, after the fact, that I had unconsciously and artificially extended the pain and stress because I didn't how to live without it. The devil you know.

And then one morning in my early thirties I woke up and realized I _had_ got away. I realized I had endured and worked and ran, and that I wasn't trapped anymore. And that I had to live a new story I didn't know how to tell.

It was the most frightening realization I had ever had in my life.

It turns out that when the only story you tell yourself is running away, you have no idea what to do when you get there. Or where "there" even is, or where you go next.

Now, there is a gap in how I am perceived and what my truth is. It is astonishing to me to be viewed as a success, to be cast in the role of anything but struggling underdog. It makes me feel I'm getting away with something I shouldn't be. I don't want you to see a success. I want you to see a human. I want you see someone who still remembers where she came from. Not to be defined by it. But to be rooted in it, and defined by my transcendence of it.

Seven years ago, I was a single mother on welfare. I had no career, little family and not a lot of hope. I lived overwhelmed with fear and stress, every single day. I went through periods when I couldn't afford a car or a place to live, while I had a child to take care of. I have been down to my last few dollars to buy food. Then I lost the remaining family I had to terminal disease. I made the mistake of trusting and relying on people who destroyed what little new hope I had earned. I spent years and years and years struggling with depression and anger and despair at a world where no one got what they were promised, and certainly not what they deserved.

And now? I am stable. My daughter is healthy and happy. I have learned and accepted and built things. I'm not afraid anymore.

I still get depressed, angry and despairing. I still struggle to understand how to live with broken promises.

<object width="560" height="315"><param name="movie" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/6xOSZtrMWys?version=3&amp;hl=en_US"></param><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always"></param><embed src="http://www.youtube.com/v/6xOSZtrMWys?version=3&amp;hl=en_US" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="560" height="315" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true"></embed></object>

I am not who you think I am.

But I grew up the day I realized I had no one left to be proud of me, so I had better learn how to be proud of myself.

From that pride, and the act of taking responsibility for it, a new story began.

And, when I come back around to thinking about where I started, I think maybe it's the same story after all.

I'm sure many of Springsteen's heroes made the same mistake I did, of thinking the promised land was a material thing. It's not. What we wanted was always just peace. Material success helps get us there. I won't deny that. No one who has had to live without material stability dismisses its importance. But that place we were always trying to get to? It's wherever we can be ourselves. The trick is, that's something you have to earn, too.

People still don't understand, or they willfully misunderstand. The Springsteen mythology has been retread and retold and twisted around to suit the purposes of whomever wants to use it, from presidential candidates to celebrities handing out awards. But none of that will ever change the fact that these stories, whether they're understood or not, are about people who started with nothing and believed in something anyway, about people who have always been beaten down and who keep fighting back, about people who had all the reasons in the world to give up and who never did. That's who the stories are about and that's to whom they still belong.

Someone once noted that sometimes a person needs a story to survive more than she needs food or water. Something that lends meaning to a troubled, confusing and not particularly promising life. Springsteen told stories that saved people's souls. And, now, that's my story too.

<object width="560" height="315"><param name="movie" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/XGGGZetEkz0?hl=en_US&amp;version=3"></param><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always"></param><embed src="http://www.youtube.com/v/XGGGZetEkz0?hl=en_US&amp;version=3" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="560" height="315" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true"></embed></object>
